[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Hi.
It's James here
from "Food Matters."
And I'm here today with
a dear friend and one
of my favorite teachers and
experts in her own right
and also featured on FMTV.
Her name is Kim Morrison.
And she is an expert
in many fields, one
of them being essential
oils and using plants
for healing and
medicine and bringing
calm and peace to our lives.
And another one is really
the art of self-love.
And that's a topic that she's
authored a book on and become
quite an expert on.
And this is really
about reconnecting
with the self,
creating more peace
and more rituals
in our lives that
help us make sense of the
chaos and the absurdity
of modern life.
And today, we're going to be
talking about all those things
and much, much more.
Kimmy Morrison, hey.
>> Thank you, gorgeous.
>> I'm excited to chat again.
It's been a long time
between conversations.
But for our viewers, I'd
love if we could just
rewind a little bit and
begin with the beginning.
How did you sort of get
thrust into this world
of understanding the
importance of using
herbs and essential oils, but
also non-herb and essential oil
processes to sort of create
calm and peace in one's life?
>> I think for me
being a young girl,
I had a vision and a dream to
play netball for my country.
I wanted to be an
aspiring athlete.
And I got to the top level,
not quite international level.
But it was through that that I
learnt the power of nutrition,
that what I ate really
affected my results.
And then I took a trip to
Melbourne in Australia.
And it was while
I was there that I
met a man called Cliff Young.
And Cliff Young won
the inaugural Sydney
to Melbourne race at 68 years
of age-- a potato farmer,
a man of the land.
And he just had really simple,
beautiful philosophies.
And when I told him
it was boring to watch
him run an ultramarathon, he
said, why don't you enter one?
And it was during that time
I had been working in a gym.
And next to that was a
Natural Therapies College.
And I had found an interest
and spark in essential oils
because I loved the smell
whenever I went to class.
And so then when he invited
me to run this event,
I was in the throes of my
diploma in aromatherapy.
So I took all my blends with me.
I had never run beyond
10 Ks in my life.
And here I was lined up to
run a 12-hour event armed
with essential oils.
And in many ways,
I put down winning
that raised to the power
of how I used the oils when
I fell into holes and dark
places of not thinking I
could carry on.
And it was really interesting
how every time I smelt certain
smells, I felt more
inspired to get up,
or I found my tummy
ache disappeared,
or I could use the
anti-inflammatory oils
on my knees and found that
they actually really did work.
And when I won that and
they gave me my trophy
and said I won the race
and had run 95.4 Ks,
they then gave me
a trophy and said
that you'd won a
place to represent
Victoria in a 24-hour race.
And that is where I
really came in touch
with the power of
plants and medicines
and using food as a tool
to win another event.
And it was during that
event, James, that I--
I don't know how I did it.
But I ended up
setting a world record
for being the youngest female
to run 100 miles in less
than 24 hours.
And whenever people ask me,
yes, I could say it was mindset.
And yes, I could say it
was the power and the drive
and the determination
and the tenacity,
which I think coupled with
all of that was powerful.
But every time I used my oils,
every time I used them in a way
to lift me or to
support my physicality,
they responded-- or
I responded to them.
And it was after that race
I decided I definitely
wanted to pursue a career in
this field of essential oils,
because also it helped my team.
When they were feeling
tired, it helped them.
To inspire me when I
wasn't feeling so great,
it lifted my spirits.
It lifted my heart.
It opened my heart.
I can't even begin to describe
to you how potent they were.
But I think the more vulnerable
and exhausted you are,
the more you're open to
using anything to support
you to get through it.
So that was really my intro
into the power and healing
power of plants.
>> Yeah, awesome.
It's funny how this
topic of ultramarathons
just seems to come up
in so many places now.
I mean, I've had the opportunity
to interview Dean Karnazes.
He's an ultramarathon runner--
Rich Roll as well.
And then even Turia
Pitt's story--
she was doing an ultramarathon.
So it attracts a strange
and interesting bunch
of people, of which you
are one of them, Kim.
So--
>> You have to be
crazy to do it.
And I'll tell you the thing
that I took from it the most,
is that I use those
ultramarathon stories
and my experiences as a
direct metaphor for life.
We hit walls.
We ache.
We have tantrums.
We want to quit.
Life sucks.
Life hurts.
So does running around a
400-meter track for 24 hours.
And the analogies have
become so apparent to me
that life is one
big ultramarathon.
So for me, I think I've
used the experience
to really identify with my
own experiences in life.
>> That's pretty cool.
And I think that a lot of
people don't have much hardship
training, right?
And so when they're exposed to
life, death, pain, destruction,
fire, they don't
have much resilience.
You use running in that way.
Is there other ways
you help prepare people
for the challenges of life?
>> I think it's one of
the biggest challenges
in today's world.
Resilience is something that
we are not taught, necessarily,
but we learn through experience
or watching resilience.
So I think perhaps
parents need to have
a look at the way
we're cushioning
our children,
realizing that it's
through the struggles of life
and the challenges in life that
really opens us up to being
someone greater than we could
ever have imagined.
And it's those little
knocks along the way that
create the opportunity
to experience them
so that we can handle the
bigger knocks of life.
You know, I'm yet to meet anyone
that hasn't being challenged
or struggled in life.
I am yet to meet
anyone that says
their life was 100% perfect.
And in fact, it's
the people that
have been through the biggest
struggles and challenges
that I've found being
the most interesting
because they have almost been
broken open in such a way
that the only way out is up.
And to do that, you
have to just put
one foot in front of the other.
And the analogy for me, running
out on a 400-meter track,
was when I wanted to quit so
often because things hurt or I
didn't think I had anything left
in me, to then just be told,
it's just a case of getting
back out on the track.
It's just one foot in
front of the other, Kim.
Just move.
Do not stay stagnant.
The more stagnant
you are, the more
you're open to being
vulnerable to not making it.
The more stagnant
you are, you're
not allowing yourself to
find that inner strength.
And I know that it's when we
can pick ourselves up and put
that one foot in front of
the other, stay in action,
stay in participation of
life, and most importantly,
acknowledge that
you're in a tough time.
I think I've seen so many
speakers and read so many books
and heard so many people say--
and even the head of Lifeline
said--
the first step to getting
out of that challenging time
is self-awareness, awareness
that you're actually in it.
And I think if you can be aware
that yes, life sucks right now,
or yes, it hurts
right now, or yes, I'm
not in a very good place
right now, in my belief,
you're already
showing yourself love
and forgiving yourself for that.
So the analogy of
a running track
is the running track of life.
And if Cliffy
taught me anything,
it was to keep in
motion and never
stay stagnant, no matter
what life throws to you.
>> It can be easy to
retreat sometimes, can't it?
>> And I think retreating
also has a place.
There's no point
putting on a happy face
when you feel really down.
I think honoring the
fact that life sucks
and that's not good--
I think honoring
the fact that you're
not a good human right now--
the amount of apologies I've
made to my children as a mother
because sometimes I just haven't
been the best version of myself
has been liberating in that,
that I can apologize to them,
because with apologies,
we also realize
that there's potential
for better behavior
or betterment of self.
So I think retreating
sometimes also
has a place, that it's important
to pull back to really feel it.
And my beautiful
90-year-old psychologist
and the best teacher
I've ever had
when I've been going through
the toughest times said to me,
you have to feel it to heal it.
And I think there's
real mastery in that,
in honoring the
feeling of the pain
rather than covering it with
drugs or alcohol or behavior
that may not serve you
or that you may regret--
is really important to
acknowledge that feeling it
is actually a fast-track
way to get through it.
Don't hide from it.
Find a way to work
through it and acknowledge
that sometimes it's so bad,
you got nothing but tears.
>> Yeah, and that's deep.
That's profound.
We're rocketing into some
topics here straightaway.
And I love it.
Typically this is how
our conversations go.
But how do you feel about
the modern landscape
of social media and all these
expertly portrayed lives
on the web and on social
platforms, sort of impact
our sense of self-worth and
what's happening in the world?
I think we put--
we see so many
lives on display now
that are so seemingly perfect.
And we have all these high
expectations for our own lives
and then all this sort of
disparate nature of comparison
and everything.
Do you think that plays
into some of the problems
that we're suffering from?
>> I think it comes
back to self-love.
You will not look at
someone else's perfect life
with disdain or
anger or jealousy
when you feel great
about yourself.
The only times you
will find social media
a negative platform
is when you yourself
don't have the resilience
or the happy place
that you're in to
actually acknowledge it.
I mean, let's face it.
Social media is a
highlights reel.
And for most of us, we use
it as a beautiful platform
to share the greatest
parts of our lives
or the things we've learned
or the recipes we love
or the quotes we enjoy.
So I think there's a two-edged
sword to social media.
There's this
beautiful connectivity
that can occur, particularly
for people in remote areas
or for people that live
alone or for people
that may be going through
a process in life,
to have support
groups and chat rooms.
And all of those beautiful
community-derived places
is essential.
I think the negative comes from
when we haven't delved into who
we are and acknowledging
that it's not
the fact that their
life is perfect,
it's the fact that
you've put on a lens that
judges that perfection--
because let's face it, if
your life was feeling perfect
and you were in a great
place, you'd be honoring that.
So I actually think it's more
about your own self-reflection
than what people are
putting on social media.
So what if they put
up the perfect photo?
up a horrible quote?
So what if it's something
you don't agree with?
The beauty of social media is
you don't have to interact.
And I find it
fascinating when there's
trolls or people that find
they're keyboard warriors
or things like that.
So my way of dealing
with them is appreciating
that for them to write that or
to say that or to judge that,
it's more of a
reflection of them
than it is about me or the other
people that they're hassling.
And I think that is
the actual issue.
It's not social media.
It's how we respond
to it and the place
we're in when we
react negatively.
>> And it's easier to
hide behind the facade
of the internet, right, as well?
Yeah, good point.
I want to talk about
motherhood a little bit here
because I know it's something
you're deeply passionate about.
You're deeply observant
of your own behaviors
as a mother in terms of how
that might impact and show
to your kids.
And I've loved hearing
about all your stories
as a mother in some
of our interactions
when you'd come home
and be like, kids,
I need a bath right now.
You know, you're
really open with how
you manage your emotions
with your children.
And that's flowed
on to them being,
what I can see, quite
emotionally stable and aware
of their emotions and
how they can react.
I've got now a
13-year-old in my life.
So I'm an instant
upskilled dad, in a way.
And Hugo as our first
born is six now.
But one of the things
that we've become
aware of filming for this
series and doing more interviews
is that we are so heavily
conditioned as children.
And I think you've brought
a real conscious awareness
to how you behave around your
children and how you react
and how you educate them.
How do you think--
what do you think about the
importance of how aware we
are around our children?
Maybe you have some stories
about some of the ways
that you've been able to
manage your relationship
in a conscious and observant way
while still allowing them to go
through their own struggles.
>> I think parenting
is one of the greatest,
most beautiful personal
development programs you could
ever enter.
I think being a
parent highlights
your own inabilities,
insecurities.
It highlights what
you're good at.
It also highlights
the incredible gifts
that simplicity in a small
child can bring to your world.
And they help you become
more centered in many ways.
You only have to talk to a child
who's watching a line of ants
to realize the joy that they get
from watching a line of ants,
to realize that sometimes
the simple things in life
are, in fact, sometimes
the most beautiful.
I also know that when we're
pressured and we're working
and we're trying to manage our
relationship with our partner
and trying to also be the
so-called perfect super-mom
or -dad, that this
illusion can create stress.
And then we behave in a
way that isn't necessarily
the most enlightening.
And I pretty much
decided early on
from having children
that my role was
to be a great
listener, but my role
was also to be a great teacher.
And to be a great
teacher, one must also
appreciate that you need
to teach from experience.
So whenever I've stuffed
up or said the wrong thing
or done the wrong thing, I
have found it really important
to acknowledge an apology, and
to really own that apology.
And so we've created, in
our family, apology rituals.
So we have a simple apology
ritual for little things.
And then we have the
full apology ritual.
And I've also called
my kids into action.
So whenever I've gone
to listen to someone--
Anthony Robbins,
Demartini, Deepak Chopra--
any of the gurus that
we just absolutely love
and I've embraced
one of their ideals,
it's for the whole family,
not just for me or my husband.
So we've had-- my
beautiful counselor
and therapist has always
said to me just speak softly.
That was the beautiful
words that she said.
She believed one of the
worst things we could do is--
and she calls it
violence when we yell.
She calls that a
form of violence,
which was quite
confronting, because I
found myself yelling sometimes.
And so we put the words speak
softly all around the house,
right from when they were
little when they couldn't even
read the words.
And so when one
of us was yelling,
you know, coming and
get your breakfast!
Or, it's on the table!
How many times do
I have to call?
The children would
walk out pointing
to the sign, which
often is quite an aha
because one time
Jacob said to me,
why didn't you come
down and tell us?
And there was a part of me
that thought, I'm the adult.
I can tell you what
you have to do.
But a part of me was
like, out of respect
for another human being,
regardless of age,
regardless of the fact
that I birthed them,
they actually often can teach
you the greatest lessons.
And I want people to know
that make no mistake,
I just recently said
something really, really bad,
which I'm happy to share.
But it was like my team
was over from New Zealand
with my business.
So I had my colleague
staying with me
in our little tiny
three-bedroom house.
I'd forgotten it
was school holidays.
And my daughter was
home from dance school.
There was seven of
us in this house.
And we were doing
filming all day.
We were writing programs.
We were in each other's
pocket for two weeks.
But on day 11--
day 12, actually-- my son
walks into the kitchen.
And he's grumpy.
And I can tell, on the level,
he's actually not happy
that he hasn't got my attention.
So he opens up the pantry door.
And he goes, oh, there's
nothing to bloody eat.
And I'm thinking,
typical teenager, just
says what he thinks.
And I was a little
bit embarrassed.
And I've gone, Jacob!
And he's just looked
at me and gone, what?
And then he's
opened the fridge--
full of food.
But there was nothing
instant for him to grab.
And so he's gone, there's
never any food in this house!
And I've told him
to pull his head up.
And as he's walked away, Taylor
said just wait a tin of tuna
for now while we wait
till we have dinner.
And he opens the tin of tuna.
And it was the
wrong flipping tuna.
So he slammed it down.
He's so embarrassed me.
He stormed up the stairs.
And I've told him
to pull his head in.
He's turned around and
told me to watch myself.
And I-- I don't know
where it came from, James.
But I turned around, and I
said oh, go suck yourself!
And as those words came
out, I was instantly,
in front of my team,
in front of everybody,
had gone to what I
call a level one soul,
the worst mother in the world.
And he went oh, if they
could all see you now.
And then I looked at him.
And Taylor yelled out
oh, he would if he could.
And it was just one
of those moments
where we all looked
at each other.
And I was so humiliated, so
embarrassed that my colleagues
saw us in pretty much a
typical family situation.
But I felt really embarrassed.
Took myself to my room,
and sat in there, sulked,
texted Jacob and said he owed
everybody a full apology--
and then half an hour later,
my manager of my business
came in and said, I
just want you to know
we've all changed our flights.
We're going home tomorrow.
Our work is done.
It's enough.
But she said-- and
I said I'm so sorry.
And she said, no.
I want you to know
that we're all--
we've just poured some champagne
down there because we've
decided that it's so good
to see you being normal.
So in that moment,
I guess the lesson
I took from it is
that we all say things
maybe even worse than that.
Another counselor
said to me once,
how proud would you feel
if the world's cameras were
in your house 24/7 and you were
portrayed out to the world?
How manageable would you be of
your emotions if you knew that?
And most people have said
to me that they would be
more mindful of how they spoke.
Well, my question is
why is it, then, you
think it's OK to
speak to the people
you love the most in a
way that you wouldn't
want the world to see you?
Isn't it time we stepped up?
Isn't it time we became more
impeccable with our word?
responsible and accountable
for our actions and
the way we do speak?
And I can tell you by
doing that and apologizing
to my son for what I
said, he also then turned
around and arrived and
walked back into the house
and said a full
apology to everybody
in the home for his behavior.
So again, giving
him time to retreat,
giving him time to acknowledge,
realizing that he was hungry--
hangry--
understanding that
we all make mistakes,
I made a fool of myself as
well, and all of us owning it,
I think everyone in
the home actually
went to a deeper
level of connection,
of love, of understanding,
of compassion.
So my learnings in all of
this is the more vulnerable,
the more open, the
more raw we are,
doesn't mean to say it gives you
permission to be in a dick head
or to be awful.
But it does give ourselves
permission to be ourselves.
And sometimes we are level one
souls and not very enlightened
at all.
That is part of the
human experience.
>> We've all been there.
Yeah, wow.
That's an interesting and
fun exchange for you to have.
And everyone's been
there, for sure.
One of the things
that you touched on
was around being
impeccable with your word.
I love Don Miguel
Ruiz, as his work--
I love his book.
I found it incredibly
impactful for me.
And it's something that
I've really taken along
in my journey of life.
Why do you think
it is, or how do
you think it is, that people
can develop such negative voices
in their mind or in their
head of the language they
use for themselves?
Because you talk about when
you said, that the language
you use to others-- but also we
use that language to ourselves
each morning.
We wake up in the
mirror and so forth.
Well look at you, you fatso.
How'd you get off your butt?
I mean, there's so much subtle
language we use to ourselves.
Why do you think
that's happened?
>> Oh, it's part of
the human experience.
I mean, when I went to
India a number of years ago,
I was so fortunate to sit-in
the presence of His Holiness,
the 12th Kenting Tai Situpa,
who is the main educator
of all Buddhist monks.
And we had a seven-day
retreat with him
where we sat at his feet
and listened to his lessons
on human and how
to heal our life.
And one of the things,
when I got the privilege
of having a one-on-one
with him, is he said,
what have you got to ask me?
And I said, oh, I've
got a question for you.
And he looked at me.
And I said, why
does the human being
have to experience struggle?
Why do we say awful things?
Why do we do awful things?
Why do we have to endure
struggle and challenge
and change and adversity?
Why?
And he looked at me and
he kind of chuckled.
And he said, oh, my dear, how
could you possibly understand
light without dark?
How could you possibly
understand high without low?
understand love without fear?
And the takeaway I took is the
dichotomy of the human spirit,
the human being, is we
must endure and face
adversity and challenge
and negative thinking.
It is part of being human.
And part of that is what drives
our quest for enlightenment
or our quest for spirituality
or our quest for true love.
I believe it's a gift.
I believe sure, in
the throes of it,
you're not going to turn
around to somebody lying
in the fetal position
and say oh, this
is a beautiful gift right now.
In the throes of challenge,
you have to feel it to heal it.
You have to honor it.
You have to endure it.
You have to find help as you
masterly find a way through it.
But you do have
to get through it,
or you become a victim
of circumstance.
And then it becomes
a layer and a shield
to stop love coming
in because now you're
putting up protection barriers.
Or my father never
said he loved me.
Therefore, I don't like all men.
Or I got dumped when I was 22,
and therefore I don't trust.
Or my mother died
when I was young.
Therefore, I never
want to be a mother.
You can use your
circumstance as a weapon.
And you can use it
as an excuse for not
being the true reflection
and absolute beauty of who
you are as a human.
Or you can say, wow.
That happened to me.
What am I going to do with it?
How do I use it to
become a better person?
How can I teach
another human how
to get through the
same experience
now that I've had
to experience it?
How do I connect with
other humans that
have gone through this to
show compassion and empathy
and loyalty and understanding?
I mean, I stand here
as somebody who has
been through many challenges.
But I look at my
challenges sometimes,
and I realize when I listen
to other people's, if I
said to everybody with
all your challenges,
let's put them all in
the middle of the room,
everybody put your
challenges in,
I guarantee you most of us
would take our own ones back.
Most of us look at other
people's challenges
and realize that
ours really may be
quite inconsequential, really,
in the scheme of things.
But make no mistake.
We're here to learn.
We are here to find our way
spiritually through this world.
And if you can't find a
spiritual answer through this,
then maybe your
job on this planet
this time around was to learn
at just at a level one soul.
Maybe.
I'm not judging where we're
at or what we're about.
I'm just curious around how we
each deal with those things.
I've heard people say, that
have lost their husbands
in car accidents
tragically young,
I am so honored to have
been married for 12 years
to that man, rather than
I'm so gutted I lost him.
My own mother-in-law
says daily, who
lost her daughter to suicide,
I had 36 amazing years with one
of the most beautiful women I've
ever had the privilege to know,
let alone birth.
I've had gentlemen who have
been married for 50 years say,
I had 50 years of the most
extraordinary companionship.
I don't hear the people that
seem to appreciate and embrace
struggle talk
about the struggle.
They embrace the beauty and
what they had from that.
And I think that is
something I personally
would love to master.
And I'm on a quest to
really learn and experience
what I can be.
So my mistakes, my challenges,
my pitfalls, or every time
I have something occur that
I'd really rather not, are
an opportunity with
awareness to learn
how to grow through that with
courage and grace and strength
and dignity, and to come out the
other side a more humble, less
ego-driven human.
To allow my experience to
support you through it,
that would be my wish.
>> That's so great.
That's wonderful.
I find it interesting musing on
this idea, because from trauma
to realization that
maybe it served you
in a deep and more
meaningful way
that you didn't
understand at the time,
there is a gap, right?
Sometimes that gap's very short.
And I would say that's true for
very evolved spiritual people.
Like the Dalai Lama, when
asked about how the Chinese are
basically taking over parts
of his country and slaying
millions of his people, he
sort of doesn't laugh it off.
But he's like, they're
my biggest teachers.
And it's like, how do
you already realize that?
Well, that's a life
of spiritual work.
And for somebody to realize--
maybe take 20 or 30 years
to realize that that car
accident was the biggest gift
for them--
is someone that needs more work.
I mean, how do you sort
of manage that process?
How do you guide people
through making a realization?
Is it asking better-quality
questions of a circumstance?
Is that something, or
a language that helps
people to make sense of trauma?
>> I think this is where when my
16-year-old son at the time sat
on the end of my bed
and he was broken,
and I'd been trying
to talk to him,
and I'd been trying to show him
and support him and coach him
and mentor him through it.
But the reality is his
pain, his experience,
his perception of what he
was going through was his.
I couldn't change it.
So this particular day--
and he was actually the main
reason why I went on a quest
to understand and unravel how
do people get from here to here,
going through pain?
And I had been asking
and researching
for three years, what do
people do to still believe
in the power of love when
they've been so challenged?
And for me, maybe being an
athlete, I needed a pathway.
I needed steps.
But I came up with
a six-step pathway
which I shared with Jacob
on the end of my bed.
And Taylor had
appeared in the room.
And Danny was lying with me.
But we went silent
during this process.
And I just drew
what I had learned.
And so in the
middle of this page,
I drew a big heart
saying self-love.
And I said to everyone
sitting there on my bed,
if we know that self-love
is the key to a truly
beautiful, open-hearted
experience of life,
and we know that self-love
is what will get us
through anything
and everything, then
we have to understand there's
an opposing force here which
we mask as self-sabotage, but in
fact, it could be titled fear.
So when I talked to
them, I said, well,
what are some self-sabotaging
behaviors we do?
Well, fear, not good
enough, loathing, hate,
judgment, not being accountable,
blame, denial, making excuses.
That's all what I would call
self-sabotaging behavior.
It doesn't serve us, maybe.
But it seemed to not serve us.
And therefore, if it's part
of the human existence,
and no one never
doesn't not do that,
then maybe it is
part of what it is.
So acknowledging--
the first step,
I believe, back to
self-love, is self-awareness,
which I've already alluded to.
But self-awareness to
me is understanding
that I'm in a bad place,
understanding I'm talking badly
to myself, understanding I'm
going through massive grief
right now, understanding I've
lost my job, understanding
I'm angry with life right now.
When I'm aware I'm all of those
things or some of those things,
I'm already back in the
pathway of self-love.
The next most critical step
in my belief is self-care.
You see, most of
the time when we're
in a place of fear
or self-sabotage,
we don't look after ourselves.
That's when we take drugs or
hallucinogenics or we eat badly
or we don't exercise or
we shame on other people
or we judge more.
And so therefore
to me, self-care
is the fast track,
fast pathway back.
So
Things like just walking
outside and putting both feet
on the Earth and looking up
and taking three deep breaths,
eating greens with every
meal, running your beach
if you happen to be lucky
enough to live near a beach,
or hug a tree-- as silly
as that sounds, the energy
and the vibrational frequency
we can attain from that is
beyond articulation, actually.
Making sure that
you move your body,
even if it's just a
stretch when you stand up--
putting essential oils in
a bath or in a diffuser
is a beautiful way to
bring nature indoors.
Writing a love note to
yourself or to the person
that's hurt you or to the
thing that's upset you--
these are all self-care
rituals, I believe,
that actually put you
into a place of gratitude.
And I know through the work
of someone like Dr. Libby,
we know that deep breaths
and gratitude stimulates
the parasympathetic
nervous system, which
then allows us to be more calm.
So imagine that.
Just taking better care of
yourself is actually self-love.
And it opposes the
force that took you out
of love in the first place.
But here's the next ones.
The next step is
self-discipline.
And unless you're willing to
put the work in and do the work,
then this can all
fall on deaf ears.
It takes discipline to
attain anything in life.
It takes discipline
to save money.
to be healthy.
It takes discipline to
be unhealthy, actually.
It takes discipline to be
mindful of how you speak.
It takes discipline
not to swear.
It takes discipline to
take care of yourself.
It takes discipline
to get a degree.
So discipline is, in
fact, another human trait
that I don't think
we tap into enough.
We all have discipline.
And if you're someone who sits
in self-pity all the time,
well, it's taken a lot of
discipline to get there.
So flip it and use the
discipline to, now,
work your way through it,
through steps of self-care,
listening to beautiful books,
reading , getting help,
seeking support of people
who actually understand you
and don't buy into the
big pity party of you.
Discipline, to me, is one of
the most important aspects
of self-love.
It takes work to
truly love yourself.
I've heard people like
Adele say she didn't
think she was good enough.
I've heard people like
Serena Williams interviewed,
saying she's questioned if
she'd ever be good enough.
I've heard some of the
most extraordinary people
question their worth.
I've done it many, many times.
So it's not unhuman to do that.
It's what we do with
those thoughts that
will have us come out a
bigger, better person for it.
So in my belief, the first
three steps-- awareness,
self-care, and
self-discipline, are the doing.
You got to do the work.
But I can promise you
if you stick to it
and you keep, with
volition, doing
that, then you will have better
self-control, the next step.
You will be more accountable
to your words and behaviors.
You will be more mindful
about what you eat.
When you have had discipline
about eating well,
you're not going to sabotage
your body by face-planting
a chocolate cake the next day.
You're going to be
really mindful of that.
You're also going
to have more control
about the way you treat others,
the planet, the environment.
Discipline is a beautiful
step to understanding
how controlled we can be.
And with self-control
comes a much higher level
of self-respect.
And that next step is
something that I have
studied in different cultures.
And I believe it's through
culture and tradition
that you'll really understand
the word self-respect.
And it's turning to
my own home country,
the Maori culture is something
I really revere and admire
and even wished I could have
been a part of, because I
love it so much.
You only have to watch the
Maori haka to understand
the essence of power
and strength and courage
that comes through a community
of people who believe in one
another and their people.
But there's a word in the New
Zealand Maori language which is
mana, M-A-N-A. And it
means godly-like qualities.
And it means seeing
the god in you and me.
And when you really
understand that,
that is understanding
self-respect,
understanding you
are of godly nature,
you are of godly content,
you deserve to be here.
When you have that, you're
not going to allow someone
to treat you badly.
You'll have a higher
sense of self-- not ego,
I mean, just a more prouder
or more loving sense of self.
With self-respect
means that you will not
put things into or onto your
body that do not serve you.
You will not embrace negativity
as easily as you would
when you hold self-respect.
You won't gossip.
My daughter nailed
it beautifully
when I said to her what's your
definition of self-respect?
She said, mom, it's
when you get up
and you get into the day willing
to ask yourself what you're
going to contribute to the day.
It's getting up and taking care
of the planet, the environment.
It's dressing with
honor and pride.
She said, it's
also not gossiping
or putting other people down.
It's not about knocking
others or having judgment,
but truly valuing
your own self-worth.
I looked at her at 17 and
thought she nailed it.
So self-respect is a very big
piece of the self-love circle.
And then I believe when
you practice self-respect,
then you have the sixth and
final step, in my opinion,
and that is self-acceptance.
And self-acceptance is
when you can appreciate
who you are, warts and all.
You love the fact
that you make mistakes
because it's through mistakes
you're actually showing others
how to be when you correct it.
I remember when I was going
through a particularly
challenging time in my marriage
and we were really struggling.
And things had happened.
And my husband had been through
major depression and anxiety.
And we'd lost his
sister to suicide.
He'd been drinking.
He'd been partying in
ways I had no concept of.
And he openly allows me
to share this in the hope
that others will see
the truth in this.
And I sat there
with our counselor.
And I said to her, how do
I be with our children?
And she said in her French
accent, (FRENCH ACCENT)
oh my darling, it's not your
job to give your children
a perspective on this.
It's your job to
show your children
how to get through tough times.
So it wasn't to hide from
the truth of challenge,
it was to show them that we each
had enough respect in ourselves
and each other and our
family to show them we
were working on
this, to show them
that we would give it everything
we could to get through this.
And beautiful
Jacqueline said to me,
when you're going
through a challenge,
always give it four seasons.
As humans we make
decisions so quickly.
Sometimes the big
decisions in life
would actually be really
nice to give it four seasons
before you decide on something.
And I asked her why
she said four seasons.
And she said, (FRENCH ACCENT)
oh my darling, some of us
are better in spring.
Some of us have better
energy in winter.
Some are better in autumn.
And some are better,
obviously, in summer.
She said, so why not
allow the full context
of your human experience
in that whole four seasons?
And really allow it to
sit with you before making
that big decision?
And I've had friends who have
taken that on before they've
decided to ask
someone to marry them,
or decided to have children.
And it really does give
you that space and ability
to retreat into self to, then,
find those questions answered
by yourself and really
live by those truths.
And I think when I look
at those six steps--
self-awareness, self-care,
self-discipline, self-control,
self-respect, and
self-acceptance--
it doesn't matter
where we fall out
or if we get knocked
by a Mack Truck
with some bad news or our
relationship falls over
or we get confronted with
life changing situations.
Then there's always a way back.
And to me, a pathway
is always the key
to help me put one foot
back in front of the other
and get back out onto
the track of life.
>> You got lucky kids, Kim.
They're lucky to have those
messages in your life.
Yeah, wow.
>> Well I can tell you at
the end of that conversation,
Jacob looked up at me.
All four of us were silent.
And he just said,
mom, I've never
had it explained to
me like that before.
You've got to write a book.
You've got to tell
other people about it.
And that's what inspired
me, that moment,
my son at breakpoint where he
did not want to exist anymore,
to turn around within 15
minutes and say to me,
I have to share this
with someone else.
Can you see how I believe
our children are our greatest
teachers?
>> Of course I can.
>> I nearly got emotional there.
>> Yeah, wow.
Well I mean, it's a real
interesting circle of life
isn't it, because I think
my whole line of work
over the last 12 or
15 years was really
an impetus to help my dad.
And then for me to
realize that wow,
we're helping each other in so
many ways, we're like a team.
He's needed me.
I've needed him.
>> I've had people say, why me?
Why do I have to
go through this?
Your dad could say
the same thing.
Why me?
So many people can say, why me?
I say, why not you?
What have you got for me?
What have you got
for the universe?
How are you going to show up
so that you can teach others
how they can do this with
courage and grace and strength
and dignity?
Why not you?
>> Absolutely.
You talk about four
agreements in your book.
Can you explain that a
little bit more for me?
>> It had such a profound
impact on me, that book.
The four agreements--
number one,
be impeccable with your word.
Number two-- ask questions.
Don't make assumptions.
Number three-- don't
take things personally.
And number four--
always give your best.
I believe in Don's work.
If we could all live by
those four agreements,
I don't think we'd
be needing to talk
about why self-love is such
a difficult concept for so
many people.
And I agree that if we could
even just take the don't take
things personally, if we could
just take that one on, it would
be a game changer in the way
you believe in yourself. .
Everyone's a-- my
husband played cricket
for New Zealand for 10 years.
And I'm not sure
if I can say this.
But his line was, "Opinions
are like assholes.
Everybody's got one."
And I used to think,
oh, that was so harsh.
But I would read the paper.
And he'd go, don't
worry about it.
And I love what
Ricky Gervais says.
"These people don't come
home and have dinner with me.
Don't worry about it."
I think it's really
important that people
are-- there are
going to be people
that want to have opinions.
And they're going to
give you attacks, maybe.
Or they're going to say
things that aren't nice.
Or perhaps they're going to
say things that really hurt.
But to turn it around-- and
one of the key things that I
took from that is if
someone says you're useless
or you're hopeless and
they're saying that
or I'm hearing those words,
one of the tools that I took on
was actually just
replace you with I.
So they're actually saying
I'm useless or I'm hopeless.
And that's been a really
good game changer for me
because it's true.
I wouldn't say those things
unless I had been that
or unless I believe that or
I was behaving like that.
I think it's really important
to know that people will
say things, and it's
more a reflection
on what they're thinking and
feeling than it is about you.
If you could learn to create
a beautiful rebounding
shield that just turned
it back into whenever
they say you, say
I, that's become
my own protective shield.
And if there's still a charge
associated to taking something
personally, then go after the
why I'm feeling the charge,
not what they said.
That's the real work.
Why am I still having a
charge around that comment?
What can I do about it
to work on it for myself?
There's a beautiful
statement-- my business,
your business, and
universal business.
My business is how I
behave in life, what I say,
my actions, my judgments, my
perceptions, my behaviors.
They're all my business.
Your business is how you behave,
act, your opinions, and all
the things that you do.
And then there's universal
business, flowers growing,
the wind blowing, planes
falling out of the sky,
volcanoes erupting.
There's universal business.
It's none of my business
what you think of me.
And that's also been a
really beautiful tool for me,
particularly the
more out there I
am with speaking and
teaching and sharing
myself so openly and so
vulnerably, that sometimes--
you know, I got given
a quote one day.
You can be the juiciest,
ripest, most succulent peach
on the tree, and some people
just don't like peaches.
And I think that is a beautiful
way of looking at life.
We don't have to get
on with everybody.
We don't have to be
everyone's friends.
And sometimes that
beautiful quote--
a reason, a season,
and a lifetime--
could not be more profound than
in doing this work of being
a human being.
There are people that
come into our lives
for a reason, some for a
season, and then there's
some beautiful souls who
stay with us for a lifetime.
And I think if we can
appreciate that life
is full of joys and challenges,
friends that will be here
forever, and some
that won't be there
for very long, that there's
happiness and there's sadness.
There's times when we
feel great about ourselves
and there's times where we don't
feel great about ourselves.
If we could just come to a
beautiful place of acceptance
in realizing that life is
a constant ultramarathon
and there's times where
we're going to be chafed,
hurt, sore, and blisters,
and then there's
times when we've pulled
muscles, and then
there's times when literally it
is important to quit the race
and start a new one--
if we can just understand
it's all a beautiful tapestry
of what it means to
be a human being,
then maybe we'd give
ourselves permission
to be a little kinder,
not only to ourselves,
but to each other, and
not only to each other,
but to the planet.
After all, the
vibrational frequency
that we all share with one
another is in fact all one.
And if we can only tap into
that and realize that I'm only
as powerful as you're
as powerful as me,
then a beautiful dance can
occur between other human beings
and what it means to be
truly in love with oneself.
I think that's the key.
>> Yeah, wow.
That's amazing.
Far out, yeah, so good.
So good.
I want to break it
down practically a bit
as we get towards the end here.
You're a master at
self-care rituals,
I mean in incorporating
essential oils,
in affirmations, in just the
way that you approach life.
I think it's just exciting
to take a lot of the tips
that you've shared with
people and with me-- putting
essential oils on
my pillow at night,
or just when you're
rubbing cream on,
rub up and around you?
All these things--
I don't have to do that.
I don't have breasts.
But there's still,
I think, so much
great gold in the real practical
applications of your message
about self-love.
Can you talk to me
about some of the ways
that you advise people
just getting a start?
Say they're on ground zero.
They've gone through
a traumatic event
or they're just looking
to make some improvements
in their life.
I love how practical
your work is.
Can you share some of
what it might be like
that you would share with people
normally about what to do?
>> Sure.
I mean, if you're in
the depths of despair
it's hard to pick yourself up.
But in all reality, to get
on and through with life,
you got to do
something, which is
why I found essential
oils so helpful,
because they're like
my little buddy.
They're like my little tool, my
little tip, my little strategy
that makes me do something.
So putting a diffuser on
or lighting a vaporizer
and putting your few
drops of essential oil
into the top of that and
allowing the first few breaths
for you to take a moment
to acknowledge that
is an art of self-care, a
gift of self-care to yourself.
It could be in the body.
I'm going to have a shower.
Whether I'm down in the
dumps or not, at some point
I'm going to take a shower.
So putting two drops of,
say, lavender on my flannel
when I'm in the shower and body
boosting my whole body with it,
is a little thing.
It's still having a shower,
but I'm doing something
a little treat to myself.
I do a ritual that I've
done every single day
since I was 19.
After my shower, I take
a teaspoon of carrier oil
and three drops of my
chosen essential oils,
a few sprays of magnesium--
I mix it together
in a little bowl.
And from toe to head,
I massage myself
and give thanks to
every part of my body.
And usually at the end of
that, I will say something
like today is going to be a
great day, or I'm a good mom,
or I'm an amazing
businesswoman, or I
can write this article today.
And that's great
on the good days.
But I also believe in being
authentic and integral
in the days that aren't so good.
So when you do that ritual on
a day where you're not feeling
so great, then when
you get to the part
where you take three deep
breaths and say something nice,
then that is the day I
will say I'm just grateful
I'm breathing.
The sun is shining.
I've got this.
Or it might be asking
god, source, universe,
give me the courage,
grace, strength, dignity,
and amazing ability
to get through this.
So I think it's about
being authentic when you're
going through tough times.
Putting a half a
lemon into your water
may seem like such
a simple ritual,
but it is such a
cleansing thing to do.
The metaphor of taking
water to cleanse,
and lemon to help cleanse
your digestive system, also
helps cleanse negative
thoughts and thinking.
Walking outside with a drop
of frankincense on a tissue
and taking three deep breaths
in bare feet touching the Earth
is a great way to
connect us to source,
or at least reach out and ask
for some guidance and support.
I believe in going
out walking in nature,
even if it's out on
a walk on concrete.
Sometimes for me when I
go out running or jogging,
sometimes it hurts.
And instead of giving up and
going oh, I can't do this,
I've got a mantra that I say
every time any part of me
hurts, my heart included,
when I'm out walking in nature
or running in nature.
And that is, every
step I take, I
am connected to
you, Mother Earth.
Every breath I take, I'm aware
of my thoughts, feelings,
and emotions.
And I am proud, privileged,
and honored to be out here
on behalf of all
of those who can't.
And it reminds me that there's
people that would give anything
to be out here
walking in nature,
or there's people out there
that would love two healthy legs
to walk, or there's people
who are so broken-hearted they
can't even breathe right now.
So part of my giving
back to humanity
is honoring all
those people in pain
through my own daily
self-care rituals.
It can be something as
simple as a spritzer,
filling a little
bottle with water
and adding six drops of
essential oil to that.
And I have them in the car.
I have them in my handbag.
I have them in the fridge
on hot, sunny days.
I had them beside the
bed when I say good night
to my children who are still--
they're now adult children.
I still aromatically
spritz and kiss
them goodnight every night.
They'll get a little spritz
with some calming oils.
And I guess I call them
aromatic anchors, ways in which
to anchor yourself to
the truth, to the core,
to the rawness of
where I'm at right now,
by giving me something to do
so that I can get through it.
I think all of these
little rituals and anything
to do with nature, food,
breath, meditation--
oh my gosh.
You see, when you're feeling
down and out sometimes sitting
there meditating is the last
thing you've got the courage
to do because the
monkey brain kicks in
or we don't feel good
about it or whatever.
Well, after reading
Thich Nhat Hanh's book,
this Tibetan Buddhist monk,
he talks about being mindful.
So even as you're
cutting a tomato
to put on your paleo bread for
lunch, as you're cutting it
and you look at the tomato and
think about the farmer that
grew it that you bought
from your farmers markets
that morning, looking at the
four chambers of that tomato
as you're cutting
it, and realizing
that the nutrients
in that tomato
are talking to you in
the shape that tomatoes
are wonderful for the
heart, we call that
the doctrine of signatures.
Plants and foods are
constantly talking to us.
Just even saying
that or being mindful
of how a walnut
looks like the brain
is mindfulness,
which is meditation.
So you don't have to sit
there for an hour saying ohm.
It could just simply taking
a deep breath and saying,
I am love.
That is meditation.
And I think as a busy
woman, a mom, and anyone
out there who is frantic
in life or feeling
like life is frantic
to them, then
it's those small what I call
micromoments of mindfulness
that is an act of self-care.
It's about space, silence.
It's about giving yourself that
solitude, those moments that
will help refill your
cup so that you can
get through the next breath.
I always say, moment by moment,
breath by breath, day by day,
I've got this.
And even in the moments
I haven't, I will then
remind myself I just got
through that moment, so in fact,
I have.
I'm still here.
You are still here.
You have got through the
worst moments in your life.
You're still here.
Therefore, in hindsight
when we look back
at those times that have been
really challenging, I would
almost suggest that anything
that's been challenging to you
in your life that you look back
on, when you look back on it
with hindsight, you could
almost say, yes, it was a gift.
Or, it is because of
that I have actually
created this in my life,
or I've become that,
or I have met this person,
or I have studied that.
There is a gift in
every challenge.
It's just whether or
not we're willing to be
open to having the
perception that we
deserve the truth
and the pathway
to finding that
new way of being.
And I can tell you, it is
through the powerful mastery
of our spiritual leaders
that they will also
say that that is
part of the pathway.
Struggle is the pathway to self,
to god, to universe, to source.
>> Kim, you are
a force for good.
You're a force for god.
And I'm so grateful to have
you as a friend in my life
even though I don't get
to catch up with you
as much as I'd like to--
hopefully more.
And thank you so much
for sharing today.
It's been an honor to speak
with you on this topic
and to see you go deeper in
your experience of teaching this
to the world.
So thank you so much.
>> Oh, absolute pleasure.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Oh, thank you, sweetheart.